Add blogpost for new Prometheus connector (#766)
apache/flink-web: docs/content/posts/2024-11-26-introducing-new-prometheus-connector.md

---
title:  "Introducing the new Prometheus connector"
date: "2024-11-26T00:00:00.000Z"
authors:
- nicusX:
  name: "Lorenzo Nicora"
---

> We are excited to announce a new sink connector that enables writing data to Prometheus ([FLIP-312](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/FLINK/FLIP-312:+Prometheus+Sink+Connector)). This articles introduces the main features of the connector, the reasoning behind design decisions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We are excited to announce a new sink connector that enables writing data to Prometheus ([FLIP-312](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/FLINK/FLIP-312:+Prometheus+Sink+Connector)). This articles introduces the main features of the connector, and the reasoning behind design decisions.
```

This connector allows writing data to Prometheus using the [Remote-Write](https://prometheus.io/docs/specs/remote_write_spec/) push interface, which lets you write time-series data to Prometheus at scale.

## Motivations for a Prometheus connector

Prometheus is an efficient time-series database optimized for building real-time dashboards and alerts, typically in combination with Grafana or other visualization tools.

> Prometheus is commonly used to monitor compute resources, IT infrastructure, Kubernetes clusters, applications, and cloud resources. It can also be used to observe your Flink cluster and Flink jobs. Flink already has [Metric Reporters](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-master/docs/deployment/metric_reporters/) to export metrics to Prometheus. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Prometheus is commonly used to monitor compute resources, IT infrastructure, Kubernetes clusters, applications, and cloud resources. It can also be used to observe your Flink cluster and Flink jobs. Flink has existing [Metric Reporters](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-master/docs/deployment/metric_reporters/) to export metrics to Prometheus for this purpose. 
```

Author: Not sure the new sentence works. I am changing to:
> Prometheus is commonly used to monitor compute resources, IT infrastructure, Kubernetes clusters, applications, and cloud resources. It can also be used to observe your Flink cluster and Flink jobs. Flink **existing** [Metric Reporters](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-master/docs/deployment/metric_reporters/) **has this purpose**.

So, why do we need a connector?

Prometheus can serve as a general-purpose observability time-series database, beyond traditional infrastructure monitoring. For example, it can be used to monitor IoT devices, sensors, connected cars, media streaming devices, and any resource that streams events or measurements continuously.

> Observability data from these use cases differs from metrics generated by compute resources. Events are pushed by devices instead of being scraped, resulting in irregular frequency. Devices may be connected via mobile networks or even Bluetooth, causing events from each device to follow different paths and arrive at different times. The frequency and cardinality of events emitted by these devices can be very high, making it challenging to derive insights directly. Finally, events often lack contextual information and require enrichment to add additional dimensions before being sent to a time-series database.

Reviewer: Wonder if we could/should rephrase to make the benefits clearer. e.g.

* **Events re-ordering**: Devices may be connected via mobile networks or even Bluetooth, causing events from each device to follow different paths and arrive at different times.
* **Reduce cardinality**: The frequency and cardinality of events emitted by these devices can be very high, making it challenging to derive insights directly.
* **Event Enrichment**: Events often lack contextual information and require enrichment to add additional dimensions before being sent to a time-series database.

Author: This is actually mixing a challenges and the solutions. I will rephrase into bulletpoints, listing the challenges, and what you need to do to overcome them

### Flink as observability events pre-processor

You can address the challenges above by pre-processing raw events with Flink. Aggregation over short time windows can reduce frequency and cardinality, filtering can remove noise, and enrichment with reference data can add additional context. These are all tasks that Flink can perform efficiently, and at scale.

What has been missing until now is an easy, reliable way to write from Flink to Prometheus at scale.

> 

Reviewer: This might be better merged into above section!

Author: Got your point. I reorganised the paragraph

### Non-trivial implementing an efficient Remote-Write client

> You could implement a sink from scratch or use AsyncIO to call the Prometheus Remote-Write HTTP endpoint, but you would need to manage all aspects yourself. Prometheus Remote-Write has no high-level client, so you would need to build on top of a low-level HTTP client. Additionally, Remote-Write can be inefficient unless writes are batched and parallelized. Error handling can be complex, and specifications demand strict behaviors (see [Strict Specifications, Lenient Implementations](#strict-specifications-lenient-implementations)).

Reviewer: Maybe we can add to the bold/bulleted list!

e.g.

* **Non-trivial implementation of efficient Remote-Write Client**. <Details>

Author: Turning into bullet points

---
title:  "Introducing the new Prometheus connector"
date: "2024-11-26T00:00:00.000Z"
authors:
- nicusX:
  name: "Lorenzo Nicora"
---

We are excited to announce a new sink connector that enables writing data to Prometheus ([FLIP-312](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/FLINK/FLIP-312:+Prometheus+Sink+Connector)). This articles introduces the main features of the connector, and the reasoning behind design decisions.

This connector allows writing data to Prometheus using the [Remote-Write](https://prometheus.io/docs/specs/remote_write_spec/) push interface, which lets you write time-series data to Prometheus at scale.

## Motivations for a Prometheus connector

Prometheus is an efficient time-series database optimized for building real-time dashboards and alerts, typically in combination with Grafana or other visualization tools.

> Prometheus is commonly used to monitor compute resources, IT infrastructure, Kubernetes clusters, applications, and cloud resources. It can also be used to observe your Flink cluster and Flink jobs. Flink existing [Metric Reporters](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-master/docs/deployment/metric_reporters/) has this purpose. 

Reviewer 2: > Flink existing [Metric Reporters](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs master/docs/deployment/metric_reporters/) has this purpose. 

This sentence feels orphaned and does not read right, not sure how it connects to the previous. I think I know what you mean, but can we improve?

* **Lack of contextual information**: Raw events sent by the devices often lack of contextual information for a meaningful analysis. **Enrichment** of raw events, looking up some reference dataset, can be used to add dimensions useful for the analysis.
* **Noise**: sensor measurement may contain noise. For example when a GPS tracker lose connection and reports spurious positions. These obvious outliers can be **filtered** out to simplify visualization and analysis.

Flink can be used as a pre-processor to address all the above. 

You can implement a sink from scratch or use AsyncIO to call the Prometheus Remote-Write endpoint. However, there are not-trivial details to implement an efficient Remote-Write client:
* There is no high-level client for Prometheus Remote-Write. You would need to build on top of a low-level HTTP client.
* Remote-Write can be inefficient unless write requests are batched and parallelized.
* Error handling can be complex, and specifications demand strict behaviors (see [Strict Specifications, Lenient Implementations](#strict-specifications-lenient-implementations)).

> The new Prometheus connector manages all of this for you.

Reviewer 2: I think in this section we should answer why/when we should use a connector rather than registering a metric in Flink.

Author: Good point. I will try to clarify, hoping not to be too verbose.
But the bottomline is that this is **data** from the point of view of the application

## Key features

The version `1.0.0` of the Prometheus connector has the following features:

* DataStream API, Java Sink, based on AsyncSinkBase.
* Configurable write batching.
* Order is retained on retries.

> * At-most-once guarantees (we’ll explain the reason for this later).

Reviewer 2: > At-most-once guarantees

Is this a feature or a limitation :o

Author: Prometheus is at-most-once by design: fast ingestion and data freshness over consistency. If you try to make a Prometheus sink at-least-once, Prometheus will spit in your face :D 
If you make the connector fail when Prometheus rejects your data, you are doomed into an endless loop of restart-from-checkpoint

Reviewer 2: > Prometheus will spit in your face :D 

:D

* Supports parallelism greater than 1.
* Configurable retry strategy for retryable server responses (e.g., throttling) and configurable behavior when the retry limit is reached.

> * Configurable behavior on retryable errors (e.g., throttling from the Prometheus backend).

Reviewer 2: Is this the same as previous line?

Author: Yes! removed

  repeated Label labels   = 1;
  repeated Sample samples = 2;
}

message Label {
  string name  = 1;
  string value = 2;
}

message Sample {
  double value    = 1;
  int64 timestamp = 2;
}
```

The POST payload is serialized as Protobuf 3, compressed with [Snappy](https://github.com/google/snappy).

### Specifications constraints

Specifications do not impose any constraints on repeating `TimeSeries` with the same set of `Label`, but it does require strict ordering of `Sample` belonging to the same time-series (by `timestamp`) and `Label` in a single `TimeSeries` (by name).

{{< hint info >}}
The term "time-series" is overloaded, referring to both:
1. A unique series of samples in the datastore, identified by unique set of labels,
    and
2. `TimeSeries` as a block of the `WriteRequest`.

The two concepts are obviously related, but a `WriteRequest` may contain multiple `TimeSeries` elements referring to the same datastore *time-series*.
{{< /hint >}}

### Prometheus design principles vs Flink design principles

Flink is designed with a consistency-first approach. By default, any unexpected error causes the streaming job to fail and restart from the last checkpoint.

> In contrast, Prometheus is designed with an availability-first approach, prioritizing fast ingestion over strict consistency. When a write request contains malformed entries, the entire request must be discarded and not retried. Additionally, samples belonging to the same time series (with the same dimensions or labels) must be written in strict timestamp order.

Reviewer 2: > the entire request must be discarded and not retried

Why can't we retry? I see the docs say we cannot retry 400 (beside 429), but what happens if you do?

Author: Prometheus keeps rejecting. 
Because 400 means "malformed data" (for any reasons)

Author: But good point. Adding a clarification about this

> You may have already spotted the issue: any malformed or out-of-order samples can act as a “poison pill” unless you drop the offending request and proceed.

Reviewer 2: How does this differ from a malformed write to any other sink? Is it because AsyncSink does not guarantee ordering?

Author: Prometheus treats malformed and out-of-order the same way: 400 (rejected).
This sink has fixed in-flight request = 1 to prevent causing out-of-order while retrying

### Strict specifications, lenient implementations

The [Remote-Write specifications](https://prometheus.io/docs/specs/remote_write_spec/) are very strict regarding the [ordering of `Labels`](https://prometheus.io/docs/specs/remote_write_spec/#labels) within a request, the [ordering of `Samples`](https://prometheus.io/docs/specs/remote_write_spec/#ordering) belonging to the same time-series, and preventing from [retrying rejected requests](https://prometheus.io/docs/specs/remote_write_spec/#retries-backoff).

However, many Prometheus backend implementations are more lenient. They may support a limited, configurable out-of-order time window and may not enforce strict label ordering as long as other rules are followed.

As a result, a connector that strictly enforces the Remote-Write specifications may limit the user’s flexibility compared to what their specific Prometheus implementation allows.

### Error-handling and guarantees

> As we have seen, the Remote-Write specifications require that certain rejected writes—specifically those related to malformed and out-of-order samples (typically 400 responses)—must not be retried. The connector has no choice but to discard the entire offending request and continue with the next record. The specifications do not define a standard response format, and there is no reliable way to automatically identify and selectively discard the offending samples.

Reviewer 2: Would the connector send out of order samples? Or is that determined by the user records?

Author: The connector does not generate out-of-orderness itself.
For parallelism, we provide a KeySelector to partition the stream of input objects so that the same time-series are written by the same subtask. 
Upstream of that, it's responsibility of the user to correctly partition data to prevent accidental out-of-orderness. We made it very clear in the docs as well

Author: Let me clarify this

For this reason, this is an *at-most-once* connector.

> If data loss is unavoidable, the best the connector can do is to make data loss very evident to the user. Each time a request is dropped, a `WARN` log is emitted, containing the endpoint’s response (which provides an indication of the issue) and incrementing counters for the number of dropped samples and requests.

Reviewer 2: What happens when we restart from a checkpoint? Would we discard a bunch of writes until we catch up?

Author: Exactly that. Good point. Let me make this explicit

### Scaling writes: batching, parallelizing, and ordering

There are two ways to scale write throughput to Prometheus: batching multiple samples into a single write request and parallelizing the writes.

> Parallelizing poses challenges due to the ordering requirements imposed by Prometheus. You must ensure that all samples belonging to the same time series (defined as records with an identical set of labels) are written by the same thread.

Reviewer 2: Do we use Async Sink with 1 max inflight request?

Author: Exactly. Let me add the clarification

* Restart from savepoint and from checkpoint.
* Behavior under backpressure, simulated exceeding the destination Prometheus quota, letting the connector retrying forever after being throttled.
* Maximum number of retries is exceeded, also simulated via Prometheus throttling, but with a low maximum reties. The connector behavior in this case is configurable, so both “fail” (job fails and restart) and “discard and continue” behaviors have been tested.
* Remote-write endpoint is not reachable.
* Remote-write authentication fails.
* Inconsistent configuration, such as (numeric) parameters outside the expected range.

To facilitate testing we created a data generator, a separate Flink application, capable of generating semi-random data and of introducing specific errors, like out-of-order samples. The generator can also produce a high volume of data for load and stress testing.  One aspect of the test harness requiring special attention was not loosing ordering. For example, we used Kafka between the generator and the writer application. Kinesis was not an option due to its lack of strict ordering guarantees.

> Finally, the connector was also stress-tested, writing up to 1,000,000 samples per second with 1,000,000 cardinality (distinct time-series). 1 million is where we stopped testing, not a limit of the connector itself.

Reviewer 2: What parallelism was this at?

Author: Max 32. Let me add this
